From Hansel minutes.com. It's
Hansel minutes, a weekly discussion
with web developer and technologists.
Scott Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number 83. Recorded live Tuesday,
September 25th, 2007. Support for Hanselman is
provided by Tellerik rad controls.
The most comprehensive suite of
components for windows forms and
tsp.net web applications. online@wwwdottelerikdotcomandby.net developers
journal the world's leading.net developer
magazine online at www dot
dot com. In this
episode, Sean Burke from Microsoft makes
an announcement that will change
the way you write and
debug.net code. Hi, this is
Carl Franklin. You're listening to Hansel
minutes from handsome and it's
dot com. I'm here with
Scott and his special guest.
Sean Burke. Hi guys. Hi Carl.
Carl. We've got a surprise
for you, even though we're
recording this on Tuesday. This
is Friday probably or Thursday
afternoon when the show's going
live and Sean's got a
little something he wants to
share with the, with the
group here. Okay. This is
a scoop, then this is
a, this is a scoop.
This is our internal Microsoft
scoop. We've got awesome. Let's
hear it. Alright guys, pretty
excited about this. Something I've
been working on for a
couple of years, we are
going to be rolling out
a program that allows developers
to have access to.net framework
source code. Wow. Now this
is, I mean, we have
reflector. This is the source
code, this and this isn't
a, what is it, mano
or the other one? The
other project. This is the
actual source code for the,
the dotnet frameworks. It's not,
not reflect, or this allows
you to actually in visual
studio, step into dotnet framework
calls, walk through the dot
framework code and then build
a better app. Wow. They're
going to be able to
F 11 into the code
is what you're saying step
into. Absolutely. It's not just
the symbols. Well, it's the
symbols and the code. So
you get a full, what
we call full retail symbols.
Those symbols are not stripped
of member variable names and
stuff like that. And then
we're going to be shipping
or shipping, but have a
server that has the code
on it. So what happens
is visual studio to do
a couple of quick configuration
steps with your visual studio
2008, and then once that's
set up, you'll kind of
magically start to get sourced
and symbols for the code
that you're debugging against. That's
incredible. So W can I
ask you why? Like what,
what prompted this and was
there a big demand for
it? There's been a demand
for it? There's actually a
long story with this. I've
been working on, this is
kind of a side project.
Now for several years, several
years ago, I did a
blog posting about kind of
ruminating how we could deliver
source code for windows forms,
which is the project that
I was part of at
that point in time. And
it generated a lot of
excitement and we had a
fair amount of support for
it internally. And it just
turns out releasing source for
us has got a lot
of moving parts associated with
it. And it's just taken
some time to kind of
figure out the right story
as far as how we
can deliver it to developers
in a way that's really
easy for them to manage.
There's a bunch of issues
around like, Hey, what happens
when we released QFS or
SPS? And the source goes
out of date and stuff
like that. And so we
didn't really have a really
tight story and we wanted
to make sure that we
had a good story around
this before we released it.
And with the, you know,
new version of visual studio
orcas, we were able to
add some features on the,
on the client side, the
visual studio side, and then
come up with this story
for the backend server side,
that it gives a really
nice seamless story. So developers
can just do a quick
configuration step. They're not installing
zip files and setting symbol
paths and doing a bunch
of stuff like that for
different products. It's one setup.
And then you get the
source for everything that we
have available, And it just
trickles down, right? It just
trickles down. Exactly. And this
is for all versions of
the framework, including three five
While we're doing it. So
what we're doing is we're
going to really be releasing
source for kind of the
core framework immediately. And we're
looking at a bunch of
other stuff and trying to
decide exactly which pieces we're
going to release above and
beyond that over time, but
the setup in a way
that we can kind of
make those decisions and we
don't have to make them
all right. Now, developers can
continue to get code over
time so we can kind
of trickle these out. We're
building essentially a platform for
this, that teams, groups across
Microsoft. Now how the option,
if it makes sense for
their business to go ahead
and release source in a
reference model for developers. Yeah.
I'm looking up here@seanburke.com. S
H a S H a
w N B U R
K E. This was in
February of 2005. Yeah, that's
kind of when it all
started. Wow. It just says
right there. I want to
deliver windows form source code
to you. I want to
do it for years and
I'm putting together a plan
to make it happen. What
does it feel like to
have a well, I actually,
I, as someone who's worked
at Microsoft now for a
massive two weeks, I have
extensive experience navigating over the
last 14 days. And I
can say that things do
move a little slower than
I was expecting. This is
one that I, I mean,
I haven't been working on
it steady for that long.
It's a, this is something
that I've been working on
in spurts and finally got
really good traction on and
got a good plan pulled
together six or eight months
ago, maybe. And then it's
been pretty good progress since
then. What kind of things
do you do you bump
into? I know that during
new employee orientation they had,
they brought in LCA, they
put in legal and corporate
affairs and they kind of
put the fear into us
and told us all sorts
of legal things and about
protecting the company. And basically
if you want to do
anything, you talked to LCA
talk to leave and corporate
affairs, is this primarily a
legal issue? Certainly it's not
a technical one, right. Actually,
you know, like I mentioned,
the, the issue about how
you deal with updates and
multiple versions and stuff like
that is a technical issue.
So there actually is a
fair amount of technical stuff
involved. You know, I'm fortunate
that I've had a great
relationship. The other project that
I run, which is the
Ajax control toolkit is another
issue that we're kind of
shipping source written by Microsoft
developers. So I'm fortunate to
have a great relationship with
RLC folks and they're, they're
really smart and understand the
technical issues. And I was
able to sit down with
them and kind of hash
this out and understand what
the risks were and took
it up through, you know,
my management chain and, and
had some really good open
conversations with them about the
benefits and the costs and
the risks. And, you know,
we felt like it's, it's
kind of a, it's the
right thing. And it's going
to help our developers be
successful on the platform. And
like I said, we have
a story that makes sense
for delivery and update and
the pieces just kind of
all came together. I'm still
kind of curious as to,
you know, what kind of
requests you had in, in,
in problems that people were
having that only having the
source was the, the only
answer to actually, I can,
I can speak to that,
Carl. Yeah, sure. So I
worked at Kirlian, right? We
did online finance and banking.
And one time I had
to call up PSS and
get a hot fix for
something and asp.net. And I
had to get it escalated
and escalated. And I was
spending time going back and
forth with the, with the
hot fix engineer, trying to
explain to him exactly what
was going on. It was
a little unusual, but I
was actually able to tell
him with reflector kind of
where I was in the
source, but I didn't know
what files, I didn't know
what lines I was basically
saying, I'm in this function
in this class, all the
member variables are wrong. The
reflector of course, is not
showing you the source reflectors
showing you kind of the
programmers intent gleaned from the
intermediate language. So it's not
reality, but for the purposes
of my debugging session, it
was my reality. So I
was kind of having to
mentally sync back and forth
with a guy who was
actually sitting there looking at
the source and telling him
here is the line. Of
course it wasn't the line.
Cause you know, one line
and reflect are my two
lines in the source. Sure.
And we eventually sinked up
and the hot fix came
out and it's been pushed
into all the versions of
the framework. But that whole
multi-hour, you know, six to
eight hour experience of going
back and forth with this
guy could have been made
much easier. If I had
simply said, look, I've actually
found something. This is how
it works. And this is
how it ought to work.
I think that's what it
tells me. Well, that's someone.
Yeah. It's actually even the
more advanced scenario. The simplest
scenario is this is that,
especially when you're new to
something or using a future,
you haven't used before and
you're getting this acception from
deep in the bowels of
it. You can't figure out
the docs. Don't tell you
what the successions doing. You
know, why you're this exception,
the newsgroups aren't telling you
why you're getting this exception.
And the reason nobody's doing
that is because you're doing
something just totally wacky, right?
You just did something along
the way. That's completely backwards.
You are your hardware one
or the other. You are
your hardware. Exactly. So, you
know, when you have the
source, usually that's trivial to
figure out, you can go
to visual studio and say,
break on exceptions and make
it happen and go, Oh,
it's because I didn't set
the, you know, the Lambda
variable, the 12 or whatever
like that. And it ends
up being very simple to
track on those sorts of
issues. If you can walk
through the code, if you
can't, they end up being,
you kind of have to
triangulate and you know, do
a lot of kind of
backflips to figure it out.
So there's a lot of
simple scenarios where having the
source allows developers to be
much more effective in how
they're using. I see. So
even if you could look
at the code that through
the exception and walk into
it and see when it
says, you know, no reference
exception, it's because I didn't
pass it and blah, blah,
blah. Yeah. That makes a
lot of sense. I can
understand that, but I thought
that's, you know, Scott and
I had been talking about
using the symbol servers and
things like that. And I
thought with the symbols, that
would be enough for you
to look at a representation
of the source code as
well. The symbols don't help
you too much with managed
code. Really. So if you
think about native code for
a second, if you don't
have symbols for native code,
what you get in your
call frame is, you know,
user 30, two dot ACCE
bang, some hex number and
another hex numbers. That's totally
useless with the symbols with
native code, with, with stripped
retail, single symbols, which is
what you'll often get. You'll
get a function name at
least and an offset. And
based on that, the engineer
can go back and on
our side can go back
and figure out what line
of code is based on
the offset. So you're kind
of forward a little bit
there with the retail stuff,
with managed code, you always
get the call stack, even
without symbols. You always get
the function names, right? So
that's, you're kind of already
there to begin with. When
you add in symbols, like
strip symbols for managed code,
then you might get some
variable names in the, you
know, locals window, Sean, what's
a strip symbol, Strip symbols,
essentially. There's there's full retail
symbols, which are essentially, so
if you go to your
machine right now and you
create a project and you
flip the configuration to retail
and you build it, those
are like full retail symbols.
They just have all the,
this have all the M
line numbers in them. They
have all the source file
names and then they have
all the member variable names
in them and everything strip
symbols are kind of symbols
that don't have that stuff.
So I'm pretty sure the
symbols that you get like
off of the old windows
and T disks, or I'm
not sure what's up on
symbol server, but those I
assume are strip that they
don't have file line numbers
in them. They just have
like variable, I mean, a
function names and variable names
and stuff like that. Okay.
Right. Primarily function named and
variable names. It's the, it's
the, it's the name of
the source code file that
would then cause visual studio
to say, Oh, you know,
using this offset, I found
this function. I now want
to go looking for this
file. If you've ever, if
you've ever had visual studio
prompt you to open a
file, you didn't have. Yep.
That's exactly. Now you'll have
that file. So at that
point, I'm guessing here, right?
Shawn, at that point where
visual studio would ordinarily go
looking for the file and
a few places look in
the path, look in the
current folder before it pops
open that dialogue. Now it
has another step it's going
to go off somewhere on
the internet. Yep. Well what
actually, it, it's actually really
seamless. All you need to
do in visual studio is
you just need to tell
it where to go out
on the, out on the
internet to get the symbols.
So it'll do its regular
symbol search. And then it'll
go ahead. And if it
finds a symbols out on
the symbol server that we're
putting together for the reference
stuff and it finds that
guy it'll download that set,
that symbol file that PDB.
And then in that PDB
is all the URLs to
the source files. So it's
actually kind of a nice
cascading story. You get the
PDB and you're done, Oh,
you have to, all you
have to do is attach
to the, you know, putting
the URL dissemble server and
the source code will trickle
down. Yeah. That's exactly right.
Sweets. Yeah. It's really slick.
And then what happens is
that when you get a
new version, you know, when
we add, you know, either
when we add more source
up there, next time you
debug it just to do
a go, Oh, well now
I can find a symbol
for this other DLL that
I couldn't find last time
and boom, you get more.
And then if versions change,
you update, you get a
Q a, we haven't really
decided what re you know,
how often we're going to
push these up, but say
SP for sure. And you
get an SP boom. You
know, we push up the
new USP symbols and just
magically you get the new
PDB, it understands the versions,
you get the new source.
And if you, if you
happen to be debugging and
you hit some code that
doesn't have source available, what
do you think? Yeah. You
get the, you get the
existing experience, which is you
either get, if there's no
PDB available, you'll get assembly
language, you know, no source
available for this location. I
think maybe the scenario you're
asking for is what if
the PDB points at a
file that isn't on the
server? Yeah. Well that too.
Yeah. Okay. Sean just said
something that was very interesting.
There was kind of a
throwaway statement, but it was
interesting to me where he
said that and the versions
are all taken care of
for you. So there's a
hash somewhere that's being with
keeping track because nothing's built,
you know, these PDBs, like
it created ne everything needs
to line up. If I
remember correctly, when you set
up a symbol server or
a source server, and you
can actually go up on
MSDN and, and read up
on how to make your
own internal source server. So
your own company could have
a source server and it's
really primarily a way to
lay out a directory structure.
Isn't it? Exactly. And so
I worked pretty closely with
the guy that invented that
technology. We've been using that
technology here internally at Microsoft
for years, essentially, what you
can pretty much run any
debug product here at Microsoft
and automatically get source and
symbol through this exact same
technology. We have a centralized
source and symbol server. So
it can handle like essentially
infinite numbers of versions side
by side. It's just an
X copy. It can lay
down right next to each
other because of the way
the file structure, Sean, when
does this happen? And where
can we get the URL
and the instructions for, for
plugging it in? So this
is going to be available
about the time we release
orcas. So the servers aren't
online yet. So we don't
have a final URL. We're
kind of working out those
level of details, working with
teams right now to figure
out exactly what's going to
be in our kind of,
you know, launch line up
is stars stuff that's available.
And then like, even after
that, what's nice because this
is a server side stories
that we can continue to
roll out additional offerings as
time goes on, disconnected from
kind of, We've been, we've
been promoting symbol servers, Carl
and I just, because I
think they're cool by setting
up in different machines with
the environment variables, showing them
how symbol servers are not
just used by a visual
studio, but also by process
Explorer. Yep. Yep. If we've
already set ourselves up for,
I think it's msdl.microsoft.com or
whatever the assemble servers is
this going to be a
different server, different DNS name,
it'll be a different one.
So you'll have a choice
between just symbols or symbols
and source. Yeah. Very cool.
Can you point to More
than one symbol server? Yeah.
You will be able to,
you guys brought up an
interesting point, which is what
happens if, is if, what
happens if you have a
source file in both places?
Yeah. I assume it will
find the first, the way
that the symbols resolution works
is it goes in order.
So I think what you,
as long as you configure
the symbols and source one
above that, just the symbols
one, you'll get that PDB
and then you'll be in
good shape. So I think
it's just an ordering issue
because if you go to
the dialogue and visual studio
does have ordering, I'm sure
that one of the things
that you've had to think
about is, is the sizing
of this. I've always thought
it was interesting when I,
when I hit a website
with  or with Firefox,
they go off and they
look at a fishing server.
And so I always think
to myself, well, if every
single person in the entire
planet were using this product,
there'd be this central point
of failure. How do you
to decide to size that?
I mean, you don't have
it, you have a sense
of how many visual studios
are out there, but you
don't really know how many
people are gonna hook this
up. Yeah. So you're just
talking about how much, what
our, what our capacity is.
Yeah. I'm working with the
folks over, I'm an MSDN
that I'm pending the server
side to put together some
numbers for that. And we're
basically the really nice thing
about this technology. Scott is
that the server side is
a static file server. Nice,
nice. Right. So you're not
dealing with like something that's
doing a bunch of backflips
and server code and, you
know, we all know that
that file servers are pretty
darn good or, you know,
I ask pretty darn good
at throwing out static files.
No, that's wonderful. Right. So
then stealing, this will be
just scanning. This will be
easy. As long as it's
behind the DNS name, then
everything else is easy. Right.
So we, well, what it
means is that from our
point of view, it's pretty
easy for us to do
the math about exactly what
a server can handle and
be pretty confident in that.
So that's, that's the upside
we're, we're working a bunch
of numbers to figure out
exactly what kind of capacity
we need, the real issue.
Isn't so much the sources.
It is the, the symbol
files. Cause similar files are
a lot bigger. Right, right.
So it's more about the
size of the space, because
if you start thinking about
all of the shores and
all the symbols, and then
you think about like, can
you talk about red bits
versus green bits and how
those things can be a
little confusing? We all think
we have the dotted framework
too on our system, but
we might have a hot
fix or patch. And that
counts as different PDBs, different
source. Well, that's separate from
red bits, green bits. So
what you're talking about is
just that every time, you
know, every time we roll
out either a QFP, if
you call up, I think
he just downloaded now. But
if you call up PSS
and get a QFP or
you get a GDR that
comes down through windows update,
or you define some of
those acronyms, I know, sorry.
So gosh, a QFP it's
called quick fix engineering. QFC
is when you it's a
hot fix, we call them
QFS. Okay. So that's a,
that's usually one or two
assemblies that fixes a specific
issue with your, with your
bits. The thing about the
QFS is that they tend
to they're cumulative over time.
So, you know, as we
build QFS, there's no way
for us to manage building
them all independently off of
the original source trunk. Right?
So they are cumulative over
time. So that means as
time goes on, if you
get a little later QFP,
you're likely to get kind
of more updated assemblies in
a lot of cases, which
is going to make it
more likely that some of
this stuff is going to
be out of date. So
what happens is that what,
what service packs are for
us primarily are rolled up
QFS with a higher level
of testing. So we get
to a point and it's
kind of all the chemo
to QFC is between the
last service pack or the
release and that service pack,
plus a bunch of additional
testing to kind of make
sure that they all fit
together. GDR is a general
development release. GTRs are like
kind of urgent. QFS not
as big as, it's not
as big as a service
pack, but a GDR is
for like something really bad.
So you were saying, you
were saying before, when I
interrupted you about the acronym,
thank you for doing that
by the way. Okay. No
problem. Go ahead. No, you
were saying before something, when
I interrupted you about the
right. So he was talking
about the issue of pushing
the data around isn't as
complicated as getting the structure
of the file system set
up because you've got kind
of a Cartesian product diversions
and coffees and different versions
of the framework. So major,
minor build revision, it could
be quite a lot of
data. Well, the data, you
know, hard drives are cheap.
So the data isn't as
big of a deal as
it is that just on
your given machine, you know,
what's the likelihood that one
or more of the things
that you're trying to bug
are going to be out
of date and that we
won't have symbols and source
available for them. So this
is something that I I'm
just, I think that we're
just going to have to
do some learning. It's really
hard for us to know
what exactly the right cadence
is. As far as pushing
updates out there. I think
we're just going to take
feedback and th the system
is set up. It's very,
very easy for us to
push new updates out there.
We don't know if it
makes sense for us to
push every QFT out there
or not. So is this
an Orca specific thing or
does it go back to
express and does it go
back to 2005? Knock it
back in 2005, there was
actually functionality in vs 2008
orcas that supports this. Okay.
Now, when you say this,
You're talking about the source
code, The ability to kind
of actually go do an
HTTP request for a source
file is kind of the
core piece. I see. Yeah.
Okay. Well, listen, we're just
about out of time, but
what a scoop. Yeah, that's
incredible. I think it's pretty
fantastic. I'm stoked. So we're
looking at the, this will
be out when, when orcas
is released when visual studio
2008 is released. Yeah. Awesome.
Awesome, Sean. Thank you, Scott.
Thank you, man. Awesome. No,
that's pretty cool. All right,
we'll see you next time
on Hansel minutes.